Enunciation:


Proof:
For let the area  be contained by the rational  and the second binomial ; I say that the 
 of the area  is a first bimedial straight line.
For, since  is a second binomial straight line, let it be divided into its terms at , so that  is the greater term; ,  are rational straight lines commensurable in square only, the square on  is greater than the square on  by the square on a straight line commensurable with , and the lesser term  is commensurable in length with . [elem.10.def.2.2]
Let  be bisected at ,  the rectangle ,  equal to the square on  and deficient by a square figure; therefore  is commensurable in length with . [elem.10.17]
Through , ,  let , ,  be drawn parallel to , , let the square  be constructed equal to the parallelogram , and the square  equal to , and let them be placed so that  is in a straight line with ;  is also in a straight line with .
Let the square  be completed.
It is then manifest from what was proved before that  is a mean proportional between ,  and is equal to , and that  is the 
 of the area .
It is now to be proved that  is a first bimedial straight line.
Since  is incommensurable in length with , while  is commensurable with , therefore  is incommensurable with . [elem.10.13]
And, since  is commensurable with ,  is also commensurable with each of the straight lines , . [elem.10.15]
But  is incommensurable in length with ; therefore ,  are also incommensurable with . [elem.10.13]
Therefore ,  and ,  are pairs of rational ,  is medial. [elem.10.21]
Hence each of the squares ,  is medial.
Therefore ,  are also medial.
And, since  is commensurable in length with ,  is also commensurable with , [elem.6.1. elem.10.11] that is,  is commensurable with , that is, the square on  with the square on .
And, since  is incommensurable in length with , while  is commensurable with ,  is commensurable with , therefore  is incommensurable with ; [elem.10.13] so that  is also incommensurable with , that is,  is incommensurable with , that is,  with , [elem.6.1, elem.10.11]  is incommensurable in length with .
But ,  were proved to be both medial and commensurable in square; therefore ,  are medial straight lines commensurable in square only.
I say next that they also contain a rational rectangle.
For, since  is, by hypothesis, commensurable with each of the straight lines , , therefore  is also commensurable with . [elem.10.12]
And each of them is rational; , that is,  is rational, [elem.10.19] and  is the rectangle , .
But, if two medial straight lines commensurable in square only and containing a rational rectangle be added together, the whole is irrational and is called a first bimedial straight line. [elem.10.37]
Therefore  is a first bimedial straight line. Q. E. D.
