Enunciation:
.

Proof:
Let  be a second bimedial straight line divided at , so that ,  are medial straight lines commensurable in square only and containing a medial rectangle; [elem.10.38
] it is then manifest that  is not at the point of bisection, because the segments are not commensurable in length.
I say that  is not so divided at another point.
For, if possible, let it be divided at  also, so that  is not the same with , but  is supposed greater; it is then clear that the squares on ,  are also, as we proved above [Lemma], less than the squares on , ; and suppose that ,  are medial straight lines commensurable in square only and containing a medial rectangle.
Now let a rational straight line  be set out, let there be applied to  the rectangular parallelogram  equal to the square on , and let  equal to the squares on ,  be subtracted; therefore the remainder  is equal to twice the rectangle , . [elem.2.4
]
Again, let there be subtracted , equal to the squares on , , which were proved less than the squares on ,  [elem.10.41.l.1
];  is also equal to twice the rectangle , .
Now, since the squares on ,  are medial, therefore  is medial.
And it is applied to the rational straight line ; therefore  is rational and incommensurable in length with . [elem.10.22
]
For the same reason  is also rational and incommensurable in length with .
And, since ,  are medial straight lines commensurable in square only, therefore  is incommensurable in length with .
But, as  is to , so is the square on  to the rectangle , ; therefore the square on  is incommensurable with the rectangle , . [elem.10.11
]
But the squares on ,  are commensurable with the square on ; for ,  are commensurable in square. [elem.10.15
]
And twice the rectangle ,  is commensurable with the rectangle , . [elem.10.6
]
Therefore the squares on ,  are also incommensurable with twice the rectangle , . [elem.10.13
]
But  is equal to the squares on , , and  is equal to twice the rectangle , ; therefore  is incommensurable with , so that  is also incommensurable in length with . [elem.6.1
, elem.10.11
]
And they are rational; therefore ,  are rational straight lines commensurable in square only.
But, if two rational straight lines commensurable in square only be added together, the whole is the irrational which is called binomial. [elem.10.36
]
Therefore  is a binomial straight line divided at .
In the same way ,  will also be proved to be rational straight lines commensurable in square only; and  will be a binomial straight line divided at different points,  and .
And  is not the same with .
For the squares on ,  are greater than the squares on , .
But the squares on ,  are greater than twice the rectangle , ; therefore also the squares on , , that is, , are much greater than twice the rectangle , , that is, , so that  is also greater than .
Therefore  is not the same with . Q. E. D.
