Enunciation:


Proof:
Let two numbers ,  be set out such that  has not to either of them the ratio which a square number has to a square number; and let there also be another number  which is not square and which has not to either of the numbers ,  the ratio which a square number has to a square number.
Let any rational straight line  be set out, and let it be contrived that, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on ; [elem.10.6.p.1] therefore the square on  is commensurable with the square on . [elem.10.6]
And  is rational; therefore  is also rational.
Now, since  has not to  the ratio which a square number has to a square number, neither has the square on  to the square on  the ratio which a square number has to a square number; therefore  is incommensurable in length with . [elem.10.9]
Again, let it be contrived that, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on . [elem.10.6.p.1]
Therefore the square on  is commensurable with the square on . [elem.10.6]
Therefore the square on  is rational; therefore  is rational.
And, since  has not to  the ratio which a square number has to a square number, neither has the square on  to the square on  the ratio which a square number has to a square number; therefore  is incommensurable in length with . [elem.10.9]
Therefore ,  are rational straight lines commensurable in square only; therefore  is binomial. [elem.10.36]
It is next to be proved that it is also a sixth binomial straight line.
For since, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on , and also, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on , therefore, , as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on . [elem.5.22]
But  has not to  the ratio which a square number has to a square number; therefore neither has the square on  to the square on  the ratio which a square number has to a square number; therefore  is incommensurable in length with . [elem.10.9]
But it was also proved incommensurable with ; therefore each of the straight lines ,  is incommensurable in length with .
And, since, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on , therefore the square on  is greater than the square on .
Let then the squares on ,  be equal to the square on ; therefore, , as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on . [elem.5.19.p.1]
But  has not to  the ratio which a square number has to a square number; so that neither has the square on  to the square on  the ratio which a square number has to a square number.
Therefore  is incommensurable in length with ; [elem.10.9] therefore the square on  is greater than the square on  by the square on a straight line incommensurable with .
And ,  are rational straight lines commensurable in square only, and neither of them is commensurable in length with the rational straight line  set out.
Therefore  is a sixth binomial straight line. Q. E. D.
