Enunciation:
.

Proof:
Let there be set out two rational straight lines ,  commensurable in square only and such that the square on the greater  is greater than the square on the less  by the square on a straight line incommensurable with , [elem.10.30]  be bisected at , let there be applied to  a parallelogram equal to the square on either of the straight lines ,  and deficient by a square figure, and let it be the rectangle , ; [elem.6.28] let the semicircle  be described on , let  be drawn at right angles to , and let ,  be joined.
Then, since ,  are unequal straight lines, and the square on  is greater than the square on  by the square on a straight line incommensurable with , while there has been applied to  a parallelogram equal to the fourth part of the square on , that is, to the square on half of it, and deficient by a square figure, making the rectangle , , therefore  is incommensurable with . [elem.10.18]
And, as  is to , so is the rectangle ,  to the rectangle , , while the rectangle ,  is equal to the square on , and the rectangle ,  to the square on ; therefore the square on  is incommensurable with the square on ; therefore ,  are incommensurable in square.
And, since  is rational, therefore the square on  is also rational; so that the sum of the squares on ,  is also rational. [elem.1.47]
And since, again, the rectangle ,  is equal to the square on , and, by hypothesis, the rectangle ,  is also equal to the square on , therefore  is equal to ; therefore  is double of , so that the rectangle ,  is also commensurable with the rectangle , .
But the rectangle ,  is medial; [elem.10.21] therefore the rectangle ,  is also medial. [elem.10.23.p.1]
But the rectangle ,  is equal to the rectangle , ; [Lemma] therefore the rectangle ,  is also medial.
But it was also proved that the sum of the squares on these straight lines is rational.
Therefore two straight lines ,  incommensurable in square have been found which make the sum of the squares on them rational, but the rectangle contained by them medial. Q. E. D.
