Enunciation:


Proof:
Let , the diameter of the given sphere, be set out, and let it be cut at  so that  is equal to , and at  so that  is double of ; let the semicircle  be described on , from ,  let ,  be drawn at right angles to , and let , ,  be joined.
Then, since  is double of , therefore  is triple of .
, therefore,  is one and a half times .
But, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on , [elem.5.def.9, elem.6.8] for the triangle  is equiangular with the triangle ; therefore the square on  is one and a half times the square on .
But the square on the diameter of the sphere is also one and a half times the square on the side of the pyramid. [elem.13.13]
And  is the diameter of the sphere; therefore  is equal to the side of the pyramid.
Again, since  is double of , therefore  is triple of .
But, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on ; [elem.6.8, elem.5.def.9] therefore the square on  is triple of the square on .
But the square on the diameter of the sphere is also triple of the square on the side of the cube. [elem.13.15]
And  is the diameter of the sphere; therefore  is the side of the cube.
And, since  is equal to , therefore  is double of .
But, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on ; therefore the square on  is double of the square on .
But the square on the diameter of the sphere is also double of the square on the side of the octahedron. [elem.13.14]
And  is the diameter of the given sphere; therefore  is the side of the octahedron.
Next, let  be drawn from the point  at right angles to the straight line , let  be made equal to , let  be joined, and from  let  be drawn perpendicular to .
Then, since  is double of , for  is equal to , and, as  is to , so is  to , therefore  is also double of .
Therefore the square on  is quadruple of the square on ; therefore the squares on , , that is, the square on , is five times the square on .
But  is equal to ; therefore the square on  is five times the square on .
And, since  is double of , and, in them,  is double of , therefore the remainder  is double of the remainder .
Therefore  is triple of ; therefore the square on  is nine times the square on .
But the square on  is five times the square on ; therefore the square on  is greater than the square on ; therefore  is greater than .
Let  be made equal to , from  let  be drawn at right angles to , and let  be joined.
Now, since the square on  is five times the square on , and  is double of , and  double of , therefore the square on  is five times the square on .
But the square on the diameter of the sphere is also five times the square on the radius of the circle from which the icosahedron has been described. [elem.13.16.p.1]
And  is the diameter of the sphere; therefore  is the radius of the circle from which the icosahedron has been described; therefore  is a side of the hexagon in the said circle. [elem.4.15.p.1]
And, since the diameter of the sphere is made up of the side of the hexagon and two of the sides of the decagon inscribed in the same circle, [elem.13.16.p.1] and  is the diameter of the sphere, while  is a side of the hexagon, and  is equal to , therefore each of the straight lines ,  is a side of the decagon inscribed in the circle from which the icosahedron has been described.
And, since  belongs to a decagon, and  to a hexagon, for  is equal to , since it is also equal to , being the same distance from the centre, and each of the straight lines ,  is double of , therefore  belongs to a pentagon. [elem.13.10]
But the side of the pentagon is the side of the icosahedron; [elem.13.16] therefore  belongs to the icosahedron.
Now, since  is a side of the cube, let it be cut in extreme and mean ratio at , and let  be the greater segment; therefore  is a side of the dodecahedron. [elem.13.17.p.1]
And, since the square on the diameter of the sphere was proved to be one and a half times the square on the side  of the pyramid, double of the square on the side  of the octahedron and triple of the side  of the cube, therefore, of parts of which the square on the diameter of the sphere contains six, the square on the side of the pyramid contains four, the square on the side of the octahedron three, and the square on the side of the cube two.
Therefore the square on the side of the pyramid is fourthirds of the square on the side of the octahedron, and double of the square on the side of the cube; and the square on the side of the octahedron is one and a half times the square on the side of the cube.
The said sides, therefore, of the three figures, I mean the pyramid, the octahedron and the cube, are to one another in rational ratios.
But the remaining two, I mean the side of the icosahedron and the side of the dodecahedron, are not in rational ratios either to one another or to the aforesaid sides; for they are irrational, the one being minor [elem.13.16] and the other an apotome [elem.13.17].
That the side  of the icosahedron is greater than the side  of the dodecahedron we can prove thus.
For, since the triangle  is equiangular with the triangle , [elem.6.8] proportionally, as  is to , so is  to . [elem.6.4]
And, since the three straight lines are proportional, as the first is to the third, so is the square on the first to the square on the second; [elem.5.def.9, elem.6.20.p.1] therefore, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on ; therefore, inversely, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on .
But  is triple of ; therefore the square on  is triple of the square on .
But the square on  is also quadruple of the square on , for  is double of ; therefore the square on  is greater than the square on ; therefore  is greater than ; therefore  is by far greater than .
And, when  is cut in extreme and mean ratio,  is the greater segment, inasmuch as  belongs to a hexagon, and  to a decagon; [elem.13.9] and, when  is cut in extreme and mean ratio,  is the greater segment; therefore  is greater than .
But  is equal to ; therefore  is greater than .
Therefore , which is a side of the icosahedron, is by far greater than  which is a side of the dodecahedron. Q. E. D.
I say next that , ,
For a solid angle cannot be constructed with two triangles, or indeed planes.
With three triangles the angle of the pyramid is constructed, with four the angle of the octahedron, and with five the angle of the icosahedron; but a solid angle cannot be formed by six equilateral and equiangular triangles placed together at one point, elem.11.21]
For the same reason, neither can a solid angle be constructed by more than six plane angles.
By three squares the angle of the cube is contained, but by four it is impossible for a solid angle to be contained, for they will again be four right angles.
By three equilateral and equiangular pentagons the angle of the dodecahedron is contained; but by four such it is impossible for any solid angle to be contained, for, the angle of the equilateral pentagon being a right angle and a fifth, the four angles will be greater than four right angles: which is impossible.
Neither again will a solid angle be contained by other polygonal figures by reason of the same absurdity.
Therefore etc. Q. E. D.
