Enunciation:
, ,

Proof:
Let the diameter  of the given sphere be set out, and let it be cut at the point  so that  is double of ; let the semicircle  be described on , let  be drawn from the point  at right angles to , and let  be joined; let the circle  which has its radius equal to  be set out, let the equilateral triangle  be inscribed in the circle , [elem.4.2] let the centre of the circle, the point , be taken, [elem.3.1] let , ,  be joined; from the point  let  be set up at right angles to the plane of the circle , [elem.11.12] let  equal to the straight line  be cut off from , and let , ,  be joined.
Now, since  is at right angles to the plane of the circle , therefore it will also make right angles with all the straight lines which meet it and are in the plane of the circle . [elem.11.def.3]
But each of the straight lines , ,  meets it: therefore  is at right angles to each of the straight lines , , .
And, since  is equal to , and  to , and they contain right angles, therefore the base  is equal to the base . [elem.1.4]
For the same reason each of the straight lines ,  is also equal to ; therefore the three straight lines , ,  are equal to one another.
And, since  is double of , therefore  is triple of .
But, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on , as will be proved afterwards.
Therefore the square on  is triple of the square on .
But the square on  is also triple of the square on , [elem.13.12] and  is equal to ; therefore  is also equal to .
But  was proved equal to each of the straight lines , , ; therefore each of the straight lines , ,  is also equal to each of the straight lines , , ; therefore the four triangles , , ,  are equilateral.
Therefore a pyramid has been constructed out of four equilateral triangles, the triangle  being its base and the point  its vertex.
It is next required to comprehend it in the given sphere and to prove that the square on the diameter of the sphere is one and a half times the square on the side of the pyramid.
For let the straight line  be produced in a straight line with , and let  be made equal to .
Now, since, as  is to , so is  to , [elem.6.8.p.1] while  is equal to ,  to , and  to , therefore, as  is to , so is  to ; therefore the rectangle ,  is equal to the square on . [elem.6.17]
And each of the angles .  is right; therefore the semicircle described on  will pass through  also. [cf. elem.6.8, elem.3.31.]
If then,  remaining fixed, the semicircle be carried round and restored to the same position from which it began to be moved, it will also pass through the points , , since, if ,  be joined, the angles at ,  similarly become right angles; and the pyramid will be comprehended in the given sphere.
For , the diameter of the sphere, is equal to the diameter  of the given sphere, inasmuch as  was made equal to , and  to .
I say next that the square on the diameter of the sphere is one and a half times the square on the side of the pyramid
For, since  is double of , therefore  is triple of ; and, ,  is one and a half times .
But, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on .
Therefore the square on  is also one and a half times the square on .
And  is the diameter of the given sphere, and  is equal to the side of the pyramid.
Therefore the square on the diameter of the sphere is one and a half times the square on the side of the pyramid. Q. E. D.
