Enunciation:


Proof:
Let there be equal cones and cylinders of which the circles ,  are the bases; let ,  be the diameters of the bases, and ,  the axes, which are also the heights of the cones or cylinders; let the cylinders ,  be completed.
I say that in the cylinders ,  the bases are reciprocally proportional to the heights, that is, as the base  is to the base , so is the height  to the height .
For the height  is either equal to the height  or not equal.
First, let it be equal.
Now the cylinder  is also equal to the cylinder .
But cones and cylinders which are of the same height are to one another as their bases; [elem.12.11] therefore the base  is also equal to the base .
Hence also, reciprocally, as the base  is to the base , so is the height  to the height .
Next, let the height  not be equal to , but let  be greater; from the height  let  be cut off equal to , through the point  let the cylinder  be cut by the plane  parallel to the planes of the circles , ,  be conceived erected from the circle  as base and with height .
Now, since the cylinder  is equal to the cylinder , therefore, as the cylinder  is to the cylinder , so is the cylinder  to the cylinder . [elem.5.7]
But, as the cylinder  is to the cylinder , so is the base  to the base , for the cylinders ,  are of the same height; [elem.12.11] and, as the cylinder  is to the cylinder , so is the height  to the height , for the cylinder  has been cut by a plane which is parallel to its opposite planes. [elem.12.13]
Therefore also, as the base  is to the base , so is the height  to the height . [elem.5.11]
But the height  is equal to the height ; therefore, as the base  is to the base , so is the height  to the height .
Therefore in the cylinders ,  the bases are reciprocally proportional to the heights.
Next, in the cylinders ,  let the bases be reciprocally proportional to the heights, that is, as the base  is to the base , so let the height  be to the height ; I say that the cylinder  is equal to the cylinder .
For, with the same construction, since, as the base  is to the base , so is the height  to the height , while the height  is equal to the height , therefore, as the base  is to the base , so is the height  to the height
But, as the base  is to the base , so is the cylinder  to the cylinder , for they are of the same height; [elem.12.11] and, as the height  is to , so is the cylinder  to the cylinder ; [elem.12.13] therefore, as the cylinder  is to the cylinder , so is the cylinder  to the cylinder . [elem.5.11]
Therefore the cylinder  is equal to the cylinder . [elem.5.9]
And the same is true for the cones also. Q. E. D.
