Enunciation:


Proof:
For let as many numbers as we please, , , , , beginning from an unit be set out in double proportion, until the sum of all becomes prime, let  be equal to the sum, and let  by multiplying  make ; I say that  is perfect.
For, however many , , ,  are in multitude, let so many , , ,  be taken in double proportion beginning from ; therefore, , as  is to , so is  to . [elem.7.14]
Therefore the product of ,  is equal to the product of , . [elem.7.19]
And the product of ,  is ; therefore the product of ,  is also .
Therefore  by multiplying  has made ; therefore  measures  according to the units in .
And  is a dyad; therefore  is double of .
But , , ,  are continuously double of each other; therefore , , , ,  are continuously proportional in double proportion.
Now let there be subtracted from the second  and the last  the numbers , , each equal to the first ; therefore, as the excess of the second is to the first, so is the excess of the last to all those before it. [elem.9.35]
Therefore, as  is to , so is  to , , , .
And  is equal to ; therefore  is also equal to , , , .
But  is also equal to , and  is equal to , , ,  and the unit.
Therefore the whole  is equal to , , ,  and , , ,  and the unit; and it is measured by them.
I say also that  will not be measured by any other number except , , , , , , ,  and the unit.
For, if possible, let some number  measure , and let  not be the same with any of the numbers , , , , , , , .
And, as many times as  measures , so many units let there be in ; therefore  by multiplying  has made .
But, further,  has also by multiplying  made ; therefore, as  is to , so is  to . [elem.7.19]
And, since , , ,  are continuously proportional beginning from an unit, therefore  will not be measured by any other number except , , . [elem.9.13]
And, by hypothesis,  is not the same with any of the numbers , , ; therefore  will not measure .
But, as  is to , so is  to ; therefore neither does  measure . [elem.7.def.20]
And  is prime; and any prime number is prime to any number which it does not measure. [elem.7.29]
Therefore ,  are prime to one another.
But primes are also least, [elem.7.21] and the least numbers measure those which have the same ratio the same number of times, the antecedent the antecedent and the consequent the consequent; [elem.7.20] and, as  is to , so is  to ; therefore  measures  the same number of times that  measures .
But  is not measured by any other number except , , ; therefore  is the same with one of the numbers , , .
Let it be the same with .
And, however many , ,  are in multitude, let so many , ,  be taken beginning from .
Now , ,  are in the same ratio with , , ; therefore, , as  is to , so is  to . [elem.7.14]
Therefore the product of ,  is equal to the product of , . [elem.7.19]
But the product of ,  is equal to the product of , ; therefore the product of ,  is also equal to the product of , .
Therefore, as  is to , so is  to . [elem.7.19]
And  is the same with ; therefore  is also the same with ; which is impossible, for by hypothesis  is not the same with any of the numbers set out.
Therefore no number will measure  except , , , , , , ,  and the unit.
And  was proved equal to , , , , , , ,  and the unit; and a perfect number is that which is equal to its own parts; [elem.7.def.22] therefore  is perfect. Q. E. D.
