Enunciation:
.

Proof:
Let.  be rational, and  medial; I say that the 
 of the area  is a binomial or a first bimedial or a major or a side of a rational plus a medial area.
For  is either greater or less than .
First, let it be greater; let a rational straight line  be set out, let there be applied to  the rectangle  equal to , producing  as breadth, and let , equal to , be applied to , producing  as breadth.
Then, since  is rational and is equal to , therefore  is also rational.
And it has been applied to , producing  as breadth; therefore  is rational and commensurable in length with . [elem.10.20]
Again, since  is medial and is equal to , therefore  is also medial.
And it is applied to the rational straight line , producing  as breadth; therefore  is rational and incommensurable in length with  [elem.10.22]
And, since  is medial, while  is rational, therefore  is incommensurable with , so that  is also incommensurable with .
But, as  is to , so is  to ; [elem.6.1] therefore  is also incommensurable in length with . [elem.10.11]
And both are rational; therefore ,  are rational straight lines commensurable in square only; therefore  is a binomial straight line, divided at . [elem.10.36]
And, since  is greater than , while  is equal to  and  to , therefore  is also greater than ; therefore  is also greater than .
The square, then, on  is greater than the square on  either by the square on a straight line commensurable in length with  or by the square on a straight line incommensurable with it.
First, let the square on it be greater by the square on a straight line commensurable with itself.
Now the greater straight line  is commensurable in length with the rational straight line  set out; therefore  is a first binomial. [elem.10.def.2.1]
But  is rational; and, if an area be contained by a rational straight line and the first binomial, the side of the square equal to the area is binomial. [elem.10.54]
Therefore the 
 of  is binomial; so that the 
 of  is also binomial.
Next, let the square on  be greater than the square on  by the square on a straight line incommensurable with .
Now the greater straight line  is commensurable in length with the rational straight line  set out; therefore  is a fourth binomial. [elem.10.def.2.4]
But  is rational; and, if an area be contained by a rational straight line and the fourth binomial, the 
 of the area is the irrational straight line called major. [elem.10.57]
Therefore the 
 of the area  is major; so that the 
 of the area  is also major.
Next, let  be less than ; therefore  is also less than , so that  is also less than .
Now the square on  is greater than the square on  either by the square on a straight line commensurable with  or by the square on a straight line incommensurable with it.
First, let the square on it be greater by the square on a straight line commensurable in length with itself.
Now the lesser straight line  is commensurable in length with the rational straight line  set out; therefore  is a second binomial. [elem.10.def.2.2]
But  is rational, and, if an area be contained by a rational straight line and the second binomial, the side of the square equal to it is a first bimedial; [elem.10.55] therefore the 
 of the area  is a first bimedial, so that the 
 of  is also a first bimedial.
Next, let the square on  be greater than the square on  by the square on a straight line incommensurable with .
Now the lesser straight line  is commensurable with the rational straight line  set out; therefore  is a fifth binomial. [elem.10.def.2.5]
But  is rational; and, if an area be contained by a rational straight line and the fifth binomial, the side of the square equal to the area is a side of a rational plus a medial area. [elem.10.58]
Therefore the 
 of the area  is a side of a rational plus a medial area, so that the 
 of the area  is also a side of a rational plus a medial area.
Therefore etc. Q. E. D.
