Enunciation:


Proof:
Let  be the straight line which produces with a rational area a medial whole, and  a rational straight line, and to  let  be applied equal to the square on  and producing  as breadth; I say that  is a fifth apotome.
For let  be the annex to ; therefore ,  are straight lines incommensurable in square which make the sum of the squares on them medial but twice the rectangle contained by them rational. [elem.10.77]
To  let there be applied  equal to the square on , and  equal to the square on ; therefore the whole  is equal to the squares on , .
But the sum of the squares on ,  together is medial; therefore  is medial.
And it is applied to the rational straight line , producing  as breadth; therefore  is rational and incommensurable with . [elem.10.22]
And, since the whole  is equal to the squares on , , and, in these,  is equal to the square on , therefore the remainder  is equal to twice the rectangle , . [elem.2.7]
Let then  be bisected at , and through  let  be drawn parallel to either of the straight lines , ; therefore each of the rectangles ,  is equal to the rectangle , :
And, since twice the rectangle ,  is rational and equal to , therefore  is rational.
And it is applied to the rational straight line , producing  as breadth; therefore  is rational and commensurable in length with . [elem.10.20]
Now, since  is medial, and  rational, therefore  is incommensurable with .
But, as  is to , so is  to ; [elem.6.1] therefore  is incommensurable in length with . [elem.10.11]
And both are rational; therefore ,  are rational straight lines commensurable in square only; therefore  is an apotome. [elem.10.73]
I say next that it is also a fifth apotome.
For we can prove similarly that the rectangle ,  is equal to the square on , that is, to the fourth part of the square on .
And, since the square on  is incommensurable with the square on ,  is equal to , and the square on  to , therefore  is incommensurable with .
But, as  is to , so is  to ; [elem.6.1] therefore  is incommensurable in length with . [elem.10.11]
Since then ,  are two unequal straight lines, and a parallelogram equal to the fourth part of the square on  and deficient by a square figure has been applied to , and divides it into incommensurable parts, therefore the square on  is greater than the square on  by the square on a straight line incommensurable with . [elem.10.18]
And the annex  is commensurable with the rational straight line  set out; therefore  is a fifth apotome. [elem.10.def.3.5] Q. E. D.
