Enunciation:
.

Proof:
Let a rational straight line  be set out, and three numbers , ,  not having to one another the ratio which a square number has to a square number; and further let  also not have to  the ratio which a square number has to a square number.
Let it be contrived that, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on , and, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on . [elem.10.6.p.1]
Now since, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on , therefore the square on  is commensurable with the square on . [elem.10.6]
But the square on  is rational; therefore the square on  is also rational; therefore  is also rational.
And, since  has not to  the ratio which a square number has to a square number, therefore neither has the square on  to the square on  the ratio which a square number has to a square number; therefore  is incommensurable in length with . [elem.10.9]
Again, since, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on , therefore the square on  is commensurable with the square on . [elem.10.6]
But the square on  is rational; therefore the square on  is also rational; therefore  is also rational.
And, since  has not to  the ratio which a square number has to a square number,  to the square on  the ratio which a square number has to a square number; therefore  is incommensurable in length with . [elem.10.9]
And both are rational; therefore ,  are rational straight lines commensurable in square only; therefore  is an apotome. [elem.10.73]
I say next that it is also a sixth apotome.
For since, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on , and, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on , therefore, , as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on . [elem.5.22]
But  has not to  the ratio which a square number has to a square number; therefore neither has the square on  to the square on  the ratio which a square number has to a square number; therefore  is incommensurable in length with ; [elem.10.9] therefore neither of the straight lines ,  is commensurable in length with the rational straight line .
Now let the square on  be that by which the square on  is greater than the square on .
Since then, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on , therefore, , as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on . [elem.5.19.p.1]
But  has not to  the ratio which a square number has to a square number; therefore neither has the square on  to the square on  the ratio which a square number has to a square number; therefore  is incommensurable in length with . [elem.10.9]
And the square on  is greater than the square on  by the square on ; therefore the square on  is greater than the square on  by the square on a straight line incommensurable in length with .
And neither of the straight lines ,  is commensurable with the rational straight line  set out.
Therefore  is a sixth apotome. [elem.10.def.3.6]
Therefore the sixth apotome  has been found. Q. E. D.
