Enunciation:
.

Proof:
Let  be a major straight line divided at , so that  is greater than ; let  be a rational straight line, and to  let there be applied the parallelogram  equal to the square on  and producing  as its breadth; I say that  is a fourth binomial straight line.
Let the same construction be made as before shown.
Then, since  is a major straight line divided at , ,  are straight lines incommensurable in square which make the sum of the squares on them rational, but the rectangle contained by them medial. [elem.10.39]
Since then the sum of the squares on ,  is rational, therefore  is rational; therefore  is also rational and commensurable in length with . [elem.10.20]
Again, since twice the rectangle , , that is, , is medial, and it is applied to the rational straight line , therefore  is also rational and incommensurable in length with ; [elem.10.22] therefore  is also incommensurable in length with . [elem.10.13]
Therefore ,  are rational straight lines commensurable in square only; therefore  is binomial. [elem.10.36]
It is to be proved that it is also a fourth binomial straight line.
In manner similar to the foregoing we can prove that  is greater than , and that the rectangle ,  is equal to the square on .
Since then the square on  is incommensurable with the square on , therefore  is also incommensurable with , so that  is also incommensurable with . [elem.6.1, elem.10.11]
But, if there be two unequal straight lines, and to the greater there be applied a parallelogram equal to the fourth part of the square on the less and deficient by a square figure, and if it divide it into incommensurable parts, then the square on the greater will be greater than the square on the less by the square on a straight line incommensurable in length with the greater; [elem.10.18] therefore the square on  is greater than the square on  by the square on a straight line incommensurable with .
And ,  are rational straight lines commensurable in square only, and  is commensurable with the rational straight line  set out.
Therefore  is a fourth binomial straight line. [elem.10.def.2.4] Q. E. D.
