Enunciation:


Proof:
Let ,  be two similar solid numbers, and let , ,  be the sides of , and , ,  of .
Now, since similar solid numbers are those which have their sides proportional, [elem.7.def.21] therefore, as  is to , so is  to ,
I say that between ,  there fall two mean proportional numbers, and  has to  the ratio triplicate of that which  has to ,  to , and also  to .
For let  by multiplying  make , and let  by multiplying  make .
Now, since ,  are in the same ratio with , , and  is the product of , , and  the product of , , ,  are similar plane numbers; [elem.7.def.21] therefore between ,  there is one mean proportional number. [elem.8.18]
Let it be
Therefore  is the product of , , as was proved in the theorem preceding this. [elem.8.18]
Now, since  by multiplying  has made , and by multiplying  has made , therefore, as  is to , so is  to . [elem.7.17]
But, as  is to , so is  to .
Therefore , ,  are continuously proportional in the ratio of  to .
And since, as  is to , so is  to , alternately therefore, as  is to , so is  to . [elem.7.13]
For the same reason also,
Therefore , ,  are continuously proportional in the ratio of  to , in the ratio of  to , and also in the ratio of  to .
Next, let ,  by multiplying  make ,  respectively.
Now, since  is a solid number, and , ,  are its sides, therefore  by multiplying the product of ,  has made .
But the product of ,  is ; therefore  by multiplying  has made .
For the same reason also
Now, since  by multiplying  has made , and further also by multiplying  has made , therefore, as  is to , so is  to . [elem.7.17]
But, as  is to , so is  to ,  to , and also  to ; therefore also, as  is to ,  to , and  to , so is  to .
Again, since ,  by multiplying  have made ,  respectively, therefore, as  is to , so is  to . [elem.7.18]
But, as  is to , so is  to  and  to ; therefore also, as  is to ,  to , and  to , so is  to  and  to .
Again, since  by multiplying  has made , and further also by multiplying  has made , therefore, as  is to , so is  to . [elem.7.17]
But, as  is to , so is  to ,  to , and  to .
Therefore also, as  is to ,  to , and  to , so not only is  to , but also  to  and  to .
Therefore , , ,  are continuously proportional in the aforesaid ratios of the sides.
I say that  also has to  the ratio triplicate of that which the corresponding side has to the corresponding side, that is, of the ratio which the number  has to , or  to , and also  to .
For, since , , ,  are four numbers in continued proportion, therefore  has to  the ratio triplicate of that which  has to . [elem.5.def.10]
But, as  is to , so it was proved that  is to ,  to , and also  to .
Therefore  also has to  the ratio triplicate of that which the corresponding side has to the corresponding side, that is, of the ratio which the number  has to ,  to , and also  to . Q. E. D.
