Enunciation:
, , ,

Proof:
For let the parallelepipedal solid  be cut by the plane  which is parallel to the opposite planes , ; I say that, as the base  is to the base , so is the solid  to the solid .
For let  be produced in each direction, let any number of straight lines whatever, , , be made equal to , and any number whatever, , , equal to ; and let the parallelograms , , ,  and the solids , , ,  be completed.
Then, since the straight lines , ,  are equal to one another, the parallelograms , ,  are also equal to one another, , ,  are equal to one another, and further , ,  are equal to one another, for they are opposite. [elem.11.24]
For the same reason the parallelograms , ,  are also equal to one another, , ,  are equal to one another, and further , ,  are equal to one another.
Therefore in the solids , ,  three planes are equal to three planes.
But the three planes are equal to the three opposite; therefore the three solids , ,  are equal to one another.
For the same reason the three solids , ,  are also equal to one another.
Therefore, whatever multiple the base  is of the base , the same multiple also is the solid  of the solid .
For the same reason, whatever multiple the base  is of the base , the same multiple also is the solid  of the solid .
And, if the base  is equal to the base , the solid  is also equal to the solid ; if the base  exceeds the base , the solid  also exceeds the solid ; and, if one falls short, the other falls short.
Therefore, there being four magnitudes, the two bases , , and the two solids , , equimultiples have been taken of the base  and the solid , namely the base  and the solid , and equimultiples of the base  and the solid , namely the base  and the solid , and it has been proved that, if the base  exceeds the base , the solid  also exceeds the solid , if the bases are equal, the solids are equal, and if the base falls short, the solid falls short.
Therefore, as the base  is to the base , so is the solid  to the solid . [elem.5.def.5] Q. E. D.
