Enunciation:


Proof:
Let , ,  be the given three numbers, and let it be required to investigate when it is possible to find a fourth proportional to them.
Now either they are not in continued proportion, and the extremes of them are prime to one another; or they are in continued proportion, and the extremes of them are not prime to one another; or they are not in continued proportion, nor are the extremes of them prime to one another; or they are in continued proportion, and the extremes of them are prime to one another.
If then , ,  are in continued proportion, and the extremes of them ,  are prime to one another, it has been proved that it is impossible to find a fourth proportional number to them. [elem.9.17]
<*>Next, let , ,  not be in continued proportion, the extremes being again prime to one another; I say that in this case also it is impossible to find a fourth proportional to them.
For, if possible, let  have been found, so that,  and let it be contrived that, as  is to , so is  to .
Now, since, as  is to , so is  to , and, as  is to , so is  to , therefore, , as  is to , so is  to . [elem.7.14]
But ,  are prime, primes are also least, [elem.7.21] and the least numbers measure those which have the same ratio, the antecedent the antecedent and the consequent the consequent. [elem.7.20]
Therefore  measures  as antecedent antecedent.
But it also measures itself; therefore  measures ,  which are prime to one another: which is impossible.
Therefore it is not possible to find a fourth proportional to , , .<*>
Next, let , ,  be again in continued proportion, but let ,  not be prime to one another.
I say that it is possible to find a fourth proportional to them.
For let  by multiplying  make ; therefore  either measures  or does not measure it.
First, let it measure it according to ; therefore  by multiplying  has made .
But, further,  has also by multiplying  made ; therefore the product of ,  is equal to the product of , ; therefore, proportionally, as  is to , so is  to ; [elem.7.19] therefore  has been found a fourth proportional to , , .
Next, let  not measure ; I say that it is impossible to find a fourth proportional number to , , .
For, if possible, let  have been found; therefore the product of ,  is equal to the product of , . [elem.7.19]
But the product of ,  is ; therefore the product of ,  is also equal to .
Therefore  by multiplying  has made ; therefore  measures  according to , so that  measures .
But it also does not measure it: which is absurd.
Therefore it is not possible to find a fourth proportional number to , ,  when  does not measure .
Next, let , ,  not be in continued proportion, nor the extremes prime to one another.
And let  by multiplying  make .
Similarly then it can be proved that, if  measures , it is possible to find a fourth proportional to them, but, if it does not measure it, impossible. Q. E. D.
