Enunciation:


Proof:
Let ,  be equal parallelepipedal solids; I say that in the parallelepipedal solids ,  the bases are reciprocally proportional to the heights, that is, as the base  is to the base , so is the height of the solid  to the height of the solid .
First, let the sides which stand up, namely , , , , , , , , be at right angles to their bases; I say that, as the base  is to the base , so is  to .
If now the base  is equal to the base , while the solid  is also equal to the solid ,  will also be equal to .
For parallelepipedal solids of the same height are to one another as the bases; [elem.11.32] and, as the base  is to , so will  be to , and it is manifest that in the parallelepipedal solids ,  the bases are reciprocally proportional to the heights.
Next, let the base  not be equal to the base , but let  be greater.
Now the solid  is equal to the solid ; therefore  is also greater than .
Let then  be made equal to , and let the parallelepipedal solid  be completed on  as base and with  as height.
Now, since the solid  is equal to the solid , and  is outside them, while equals have to the same the same ratio, [elem.5.7] therefore, as the solid  is to the solid , so is the solid  to the solid .
But, as the solid  is to the solid , so is the base  to the base , for the solids ,  are of equal height; [elem.11.32] and, as the solid  is to the solid , so is the base  to the base  [elem.11.25] and  to  [elem.6.1]; therefore also, as the base  is to the base , so is  to .
But  is equal to ; therefore also, as the base  is to the base , so is  to .
Therefore in the parallelepipedal solids ,  the bases are reciprocally proportional to the heights.
Again, in the parallelepipedal solids ,  let the bases be reciprocally proportional to the heights, that is, as the base  is to the base , so let the height of the solid  be to the height of the solid ; I say that the solid  is equal to the solid .
Let the sides which stand up be again at right angles to the bases.
Now, if the base  is equal to the base , and, as the base  is to the base , so is the height of the solid  to the height of the solid , therefore the height of the solid  is also equal to the height of the solid .
But parallelepipedal solids on equal bases and of the same height are equal to one another; [elem.11.31] therefore the solid  is equal to the solid .
Next, let the base  not be equal to the base , but let  be greater; therefore the height of the solid  is also greater than the height of the solid , that is,  is greater than .
Let  be again made equal to , and let the solid  be similarly completed.
Since, as the base  is to the base , so is  to , while  is equal to , therefore, as the base  is to the base , so is  to .
But, as the base  is to the base , so is the solid  to the solid , for the solids ,  are of equal height; [elem.11.32] and, as  is to , so is the base  to the base  [elem.6.1] and the solid  to the solid . [elem.11.25]
Therefore also, as the solid  is to the solid , so is the solid  to the solid ; therefore each of the solids ,  has to  the same ratio.
Therefore the solid  is equal to the solid . [elem.5.9]
Now let the sides which stand up, , , , , , , , , not be at right angles to their bases; let perpendiculars be drawn from the points , , , , , , ,  to the planes through , , and let them meet the planes at , , , , , , , , and let the solids ,  be completed; I say that, in this case too, if the solids ,  are equal, the bases are reciprocally proportional to the heights, that is, as the base  is to the base , so is the height of the solid  to the height of the solid .
Since the solid  is equal to the solid , while  is equal to , for they are on the same base  and of the same height; [elem.11.29 elem.11.30] and the solid  is equal to , for they are again on the same base  and of the same height; [] therefore the solid  is also equal to the solid .
Therefore, as the base  is to the base , so is the height of the solid  to the height of the solid . [Part 1.]
But the base  is equal to the base , and the base  to the base ; therefore, as the base  is to the base , so is the height of the solid  to the height of the solid .
But the solids ,  and the solids ,  have the same heights respectively; therefore, as the base  is to the base , so is the height of the solid  to the height of the solid .
Therefore in the parallelepipedal solids ,  the bases are reciprocally proportional to the heights.
Again, in the parallelepipedal solids ,  let the bases be reciprocally proportional to the heights, that is, as the base  is to the base , so let the height of the solid  be to the height of the solid ; I say that the solid  is equal to the solid .
For, with the same construction, since, as the base  is to the base , so is the height of the solid  to the height of the solid , while the base  is equal to the base , and  to , therefore, as the base  is to the base , so is the height of the solid  to the height of the solid .
But the solids ,  and ,  have the same heights respectively; therefore, as the base  is to the base , so is the height of the solid  to the height of the solid .
Therefore in the parallelepipedal solids ,  the bases are reciprocally proportional to the heights; therefore the solid  is equal to the solid . [Part 1.]
But  is equal to , for they are on the same base  and of the same height; [elem.11.29 elem.11.30] and the solid  is equal to the solid . []
Therefore the solid  is also equal to the solid . Q. E. D.
