Enunciation:


Proof:
Let there be pyramids of the same height, of which the triangles ,  are the bases and the points ,  the vertices; I say that, as the base  is to the base , so is the pyramid  to the pyramid .
For, if the pyramid  is not to the pyramid  as the base  is to the base , then, as the base  is to the base , so will the pyramid  be either to some solid less than the pyramid  or to a greater.
Let it, first, be in that ratio to a less solid , and let the pyramid  be divided into two pyramids equal to one another and similar to the whole and into two equal prisms; then the two prisms are greater than the half of the whole pyramid. [elem.12.3]
Again, let the pyramids arising from the division be similarly divided, and let this be done continually until there are left over from the pyramid  some pyramids which are less than the excess by which the pyramid  exceeds the solid . [X. I]
Let such be left, and let them be, for the sake of argument, , ; therefore the remainders, the prisms in the pyramid , are greater than the solid .
Let the pyramid  also be divided similarly, and a similar number of times, with the pyramid ; therefore, as the base  is to the base , so are the prisms in the pyramid  to the prisms in the pyramid . [elem.12.4]
But, as the base  is to the base , so also is the pyramid  to the solid ; therefore also, as the pyramid  is to the solid , so are the prisms in the pyramid  to the prisms in the pyramid ; [V. II] therefore, alternately, as the pyramid  is to the prisms in it, so is the solid  to the prisms in the pyramid . [elem.5.16]
But the pyramid  is greater than the prisms in it; therefore the solid  is also greater than the prisms in the pyramid .
But it is also less: which is impossible.
Therefore the prism  is not to any solid less than the pyramid  as the base  is to the base .
Similarly it can be proved that neither is the pyramid  to any solid less than the pyramid  as the base  is to the base .
I say next that neither is the pyramid  to any solid greater than the pyramid  as the base  is to the base .
For, if possible, let it be in that ratio to a greater solid ; therefore, inversely, as the base  is to the base , so is the solid  to the pyramid .
But, as the solid  is to the solid , so is the pyramid  to some solid less than the pyramid , as was before proved; [elem.12.2.l.1] therefore also, as the base  is to the base , so is the pyramid  to some solid less than the pyramid : [V. II] which was proved absurd.
Therefore the pyramid  is not to any solid greater than the pyramid  as the base  is to the base .
But it was proved that neither is it in that ratio to a less solid.
Therefore, as the base  is to the base , so is the pyramid  to the pyramid . Q. E. D.
