Enunciation:


Proof:
Let there be cones and cylinders of the same height, let the circles ,  be their bases, ,  their axes and ,  the diameters of their bases; I say that, as the circle  is to the circle , so is the cone  to the cone .
For, if not, then, as the circle  is to the circle , so will the cone  be either to some solid less than the cone  or to a greater.
First, let it be in that ratio to a less solid , and let the solid  be equal to that by which the solid  is less than the cone ; therefore the cone  is equal to the solids , .
Let the square  be inscribed in the circle ; therefore the square is greater than the half of the circle.
Let there be set up from the square  a pyramid of equal height with the cone; therefore the pyramid so set up is greater than the half of the cone, inasmuch as, if we circumscribe a square about the circle, and set up from it a pyramid of equal height with the cone, the inscribed pyramid is half of the circumscribed pyramid, for they are to one another as their bases, [elem.12.6] while the cone is less than the circumscribed pyramid.
Let the circumferences , , ,  be bisected at the points , , , , and let , , , , , , ,  be joined.
Therefore each of the triangles , , ,  is greater than the half of that segment of the circle which is about it.
On each of the triangles , , ,  let there be set up a pyramid of equal height with the cone; therefore, also, each of the pyramids so set up is greater than the half of that segment of the cone which is about it.
Thus, bisecting the circumferences which are left, joining straight lines, setting up on each of the triangles pyramids of equal height with the cone, and doing this continually, we shall leave some segments of the cone which will be less than the solid . [elem.10.1]
Let such be left, and let them be the segments on , , , , , , , ; therefore the remainder, the pyramid of which the polygon  is the base and the height the same with that of the cone, is greater than the solid .
Let there also be inscribed in the circle  the polygon  similar and similarly situated to the polygon , and on it let a pyramid be set up of equal height with the cone .
Since then, as the square on  is to the square on , so is the polygon  to the polygon , [elem.12.1] while, as the square on  is to the square on , so is the circle  to the circle , [elem.12.2] therefore also, as the circle  is to the circle , so is the polygon  to the polygon .
But, as the circle  is to the circle , so is the cone  to the solid , and, as the polygon  is to the polygon , so is the pyramid of which the polygon  is the base and the point  the vertex to the pyramid of which the polygon  is the base and the point  the vertex. [elem.12.6]
Therefore also, as the cone  is to the solid , so is the pyramid of which the polygon  is the base and the point  the vertex to the pyramid of which the polygon  is the base and the point  the vertex; [elem.5.11] therefore, alternately, as the cone  is to the pyramid in it, so is the solid  to the pyramid in the cone . [elem.5.16]
But the cone  is greater than the pyramid in it; therefore the solid  is also greater than the pyramid in the cone .
But it is also less: which is absurd.
Therefore the cone  is not to any solid less than the cone  as the circle  is to the circle .
Similarly we can prove that neither is the cone  to any solid less than the cone  as the circle  is to the circle .
I say next that neither is the cone  to any solid greater than the cone  as the circle  is to the circle .
For, if possible, let it be in that ratio to a greater solid ; therefore, inversely, as the circle  is to the circle , so is the solid  to the cone .
But, as the solid  is to the cone , so is the cone  to some solid less than the cone ; therefore also, as the circle  is to the circle , so is the cone  to some solid less than the cone : which was proved impossible.
Therefore the cone  is not to any solid greater than the cone  as the circle  is to the circle .
But it was proved that neither is it in this ratio to a less solid; therefore, as the circle  is to the circle , so is the cone  to the cone .
But, as the cone is to the cone, so is the cylinder to the cylinder, for each is triple of each; [elem.12.10]
Therefore also, as the circle  is to the circle , so are the cylinders on them which are of equal height.
Therefore etc. Q. E. D.
