Enunciation:


Proof:
Let ,  be circles, and ,  their diameters; I say that, as the circle  is to the circle , so is the square on  to the square on .
For, if the square on  is not to the square on  as the circle  is to the circle , then, as the square on  is to the square on , so will the circle  be either to some less area than the circle , or to a greater.
First, let it be in that ratio to a less area .
Let the square  be inscribed in the circle ; then the inscribed square is greater than the half of the circle , inasmuch as, if through the points , , ,  we draw tangents to the circle, the square  is half the square circumscribed about the circle, and the circle is less than the circumscribed square; hence the inscribed square  is greater than the half of the circle .
Let the circumferences , , ,  be bisected at the points , , , , and let , , , , , , ,  be joined; therefore each of the triangles , , ,  is also greater than the half of the segment of the circle about it, inasmuch as, if through the points , , ,  we draw tangents to the circle and complete the parallelograms on the straight lines , , , , each of the triangles , , ,  will be half of the parallelogram about it, while the segment about it is less than the parallelogram; hence each of the triangles , , ,  is greater than the half of the segment of the circle about it.
Thus, by bisecting the remaining circumferences and joining straight lines, and by doing this continually, we shall leave some segments of the circle which will be less than the excess by which the circle  exceeds the area .
For it was proved in the first theorem of the tenth book that, if two unequal magnitudes be set out, and if from the greater there be subtracted a magnitude greater than the half, and from that which is left a greater than the half, and if this be done continually, there will be left some magnitude which will be less than the lesser magnitude set out.
Let segments be left such as described, and let the segments of the circle  on , , , , , , ,  be less than the excess by which the circle  exceeds the area .
Therefore the remainder, the polygon , is greater than the area .
Let there be inscribed, also, in the circle  the polygon  similar to the polygon ; therefore, as the square on  is to the square on , so is the polygon  to the polygon . [elem.12.1]
But, as the square on  is to the square on , so also is the circle  to the area ; therefore also, as the circle  is to the area , so is the polygon  to the polygon ; [elem.5.11] therefore, alternately, as the circle  is to the polygon inscribed in it, so is the area  to the polygon . [elem.5.16]
But the circle  is greater than the polygon inscribed in it; therefore the area  is also greater than the polygon .
But it is also less: which is impossible.
Therefore, as the square on  is to the square on , so is not the circle  to any area less than the circle .
Similarly we can prove that neither is the circle  to any area less than the circle  as the square on  is to the square on .
I say next that neither is the circle  to any area greater than the circle  as the square on  is to the square on .
For, if possible, let it be in that ratio to a greater area .
Therefore, inversely, as the square on  is to the square on , so is the area  to the circle .
But, as the area  is to the circle , so is the circle  to some area less than the circle ; therefore also, as the square on  is to the square on , so is the circle  to some area less than the circle : [elem.5.11] which was proved impossible.
Therefore, as the square on  is to the square on , so is not the circle  to any area greater than the circle .
And it was proved that neither is it in that ratio to any area less than the circle ; therefore, as the square on  is to the square on , so is the circle  to the circle .
Therefore etc. Q. E. D.
