Enunciation:


Proof:
Let  be the straight line which produces with a medial area a medial whole, and  a rational straight line, and to  let  be applied equal to the square on  and producing  as breadth; I say that  is a sixth apotome.
For let  be the annex to ; therefore ,  are straight lines incommensurable in square which make the sum of the squares on them medial, twice the rectangle ,  medial, and the squares on ,  incommensurable with twice the rectangle , . [elem.10.78]
Now to  let there be applied  equal to the square on  and producing  as breadth, and  equal to the square on ; therefore the whole  is equal to the squares on , ; therefore  is also medial.
And it is applied to the rational straight line , producing  as breadth; therefore  is rational and incommensurable in length with . [elem.10.22]
Since now  is equal to the squares on , , and, in these,  is equal to the square on , therefore the remainder  is equal to twice the rectangle , . [elem.2.7]
And twice the rectangle ,  is medial; therefore  is also medial.
And it is applied to the rational straight line , producing  as breadth; therefore  is rational and incommensurable in length with . [elem.10.22]
And, since the squares on ,  are incommensurable with twice the rectangle , , and  is equal to the squares on , , and  equal to twice the rectangle , , therefore  is incommensurable with .
But, as  is to , so is  to ; [elem.6.1] therefore  is incommensurable in length with . [elem.10.11]
And both are rational.
Therefore ,  are rational straight lines commensurable in square only; therefore  is an apotome. [elem.10.73]
I say next that it is also a sixth apotome.
For, since  is equal to twice the rectangle , , let  be bisected at , and let  be drawn through  parallel to ; therefore each of the rectangles ,  is equal to the rectangle , .
And, since ,  are incommensurable in square, therefore the square on  is incommensurable with the square on .
But  is equal to the square on , and  is equal to the square on ; therefore  is incommensurable with .
But, as  is to , so is  to ; [elem.6.1] therefore  is incommensurable with . [elem.10.11]
And, since the rectangle ,  is a mean proportional between the squares on , , and  is equal to the square on ,  equal to the square on , and  equal to the rectangle , , therefore  is also a mean proportional between , ; therefore, as  is to , so is  to .
And for the same reason as before the square on  is greater than the square on  by the square on a straight line incommensurable with . [elem.10.18]
And neither of them is commensurable with the rational straight line  set out; therefore  is a sixth apotome. [elem.10.def.3.6] Q. E. D.
