Enunciation:


Proof:
Let , ,  be the three given numbers not prime to one another; thus it is required to find the greatest common measure of , , .
For let the greatest common measure, , of the two numbers ,  be taken; [elem.7.2] then  either measures, or does not measure, .
First, let it measure it.
But it measures ,  also; therefore  measures , , ; therefore  is a common measure of , , .
I say that it is also the greatest.
For, if  is not the greatest common measure of , , , some number which is greater than  will measure the numbers , , .
Let such a number measure them, and let it be .
Since then  measures , , , it will also measure , ; therefore it will also measure the greatest common measure of , . [elem.7.2.p.1]
But the greatest common measure of ,  is ; therefore  measures , the greater the less: which is impossible.
Therefore no number which is greater than  will measure the numbers , , ;
Next, let  not measure ; I say first that ,  are not prime to one another.
For, since , ,  are not prime to one another, some number will measure them.
Now that which measures , ,  will also measure , , and will measure , the greatest common measure of , . [elem.7.2.p.1]
But it measures  also; therefore some number will measure the numbers , ; therefore ,  are not prime to one another.
Let then their greatest common measure  be taken. [elem.7.2]
Then, since  measures , and  measures , , therefore  also measures , .
But it measures  also; therefore  measures , , ; therefore  is a common measure of , , .
I say next that it is also the greatest.
For, if  is not the greatest common measure of , , , some number which is greater than  will measure the numbers , , .
Let such a number measure them, and let it be .
Now, since  measures , , , it also measures , ; therefore it will also measure the greatest common measure of , . [elem.7.2.p.1]
But the greatest common measure of ,  is ; therefore  measures .
And it measures  also; therefore  measures , ; therefore it will also measure the greatest common measure of , . [elem.7.2.p.1]
But the greatest common measure of ,  is ; therefore  measures , the greater the less: which is impossible.
Therefore no number which is greater than  will measure the numbers , , ; therefore  is the greatest common measure of , , . Q. E. D.
