Enunciation:


Proof:
.
Let ,  be two unequal straight lines, of which  is the greater, and let there be applied to  a parallelogram equal to the fourth part of the square on the less, , that is, equal to the square on the half of , and deficient by a square figure. Let this be the rectangle , , [cf. Lemma]  and let  be commensurable in length with ; I say that the square on  is greater than the square on  by the square on a straight line commensurable with .
For let  be bisected at the point , and let  be made equal to .
Therefore the remainder  is equal to .
And, since the straight line  has been cut into equal parts at , and into unequal parts at , therefore the rectangle contained by , , together with the square on , is equal to the square on ; [elem.2.5]
And the same is true of their quadruples; therefore four times the rectangle , , together with four times the square on , is equal to four times the square on .
But the square on  is equal to four times the rectangle , ; and the square on  is equal to four times the square on , for  is double of .
And the square on  is equal to four times the square on , for again  is double of .
Therefore the squares on ,  are equal to the square on , so that the square on  is greater than the square on  by the square on .
It is to be proved that  is also commensurable with .
Since  is commensurable in length with , therefore  is also commensurable in length with . [X. 15]
But  is commensurable in length with , , for  is equal to . [elem.10.6]
Therefore  is also commensurable in length with , , [elem.10.12] so that  is also commensurable in length with the remainder ; [elem.10.15] therefore the square on  is greater than the square on  by the square on a straight line commensurable with .
Next, let the square on  be greater than the square on  by the square on a straight line commensurable with , let a parallelogram be applied to  equal to the fourth part of the square on  and deficient by a square figure, and let it be the rectangle , .
It is to be proved that  is commensurable in length with .
With the same construction, we can prove similarly that the square on  is greater than the square on  by the square on .
But the square on  is greater than the square on  by the square on a straight line commensurable with .
Therefore  is commensurable in length with , so that  is also commensurable in length with the remainder, the sum of , . [elem.10.15]
But the sum of ,  is commensurable with , [elem.10.6] so that  is also commensurable in length with ; [elem.10.12] and therefore, ,  is commensurable in length with . [elem.10.15]
Therefore etc.
