Enunciation:
.

Proof:
For let the area  be contained by the rational straight line  and the second apotome ; I say that the 
 of the area  is a first apotome of a medial straight line.
For let  be the annex to ; therefore ,  are rational straight lines commensurable in square only, [elem.10.73] and the annex  is commensurable with the rational straight line  set out, while the square on the whole  is greater than the square on the annex  by the square on a straight line commensurable in length with . [elem.10.def.3.2]
Since then the square on  is greater than the square on  by the square on a straight line commensurable with , therefore, if there be applied to  a parallelogram equal to the fourth part of the square on  and deficient by a square figure, it divides it into commensurable parts. [elem.10.17]
Let then  be bisected at , let there be applied to  a parallelogram equal to the square on  and deficient by a square figure, and let it be the rectangle , ; therefore  is commensurable in length with .
Therefore  is also commensurable in length with each of the straight lines , . [elem.10.15]
But  is rational and incommensurable in length with ; therefore each of the straight lines ,  is also rational and incommensurable in length with ; [elem.10.13] therefore each of the rectangles ,  is medial. [elem.10.21]
Again, since  is commensurable with , therefore  is also commensurable with each of the straight lines , . [elem.10.15]
But  is commensurable in length with .
Therefore each of the rectangles ,  is rational. [elem.10.19]
Let then the square  be constructed equal to , and let there be subtracted  equal to  and being about the same angle with , namely the angle ; therefore the squares ,  are about the same diameter. [elem.6.26]
Let  be their diameter, and let the figure be drawn.
Since then ,  are medial and are equal to the squares on , , the squares on ,  are also medial; therefore ,  are also medial straight lines commensurable in square only.
And, since the rectangle ,  is equal to the square on , therefore, as  is to , so is  to , [elem.6.17] while, as  is to , so is  to , and, as  is to , so is  to ; [elem.6.1] therefore  is a mean proportional between , . [elem.5.11]
But  is also a mean proportional between the squares , , and  is equal to , and  to ; therefore  is also equal to .
But  is equal to , and  equal to ; therefore the whole  is equal to the gnomon  and .
Since then the whole  is equal to , , and, in these,  is equal to the gnomon  and , therefore the remainder  is equal to .
But  is the square on ; therefore the square on  is equal to the area ; therefore  is the 
 of the area .
I say that  is a first apotome of a medial straight line.
For, since  is rational and is equal to , therefore , that is, the rectangle , , is rational.
But  was proved medial; therefore  is incommensurable with .
But, as  is to , so is  to ; [elem.6.1] therefore ,  are incommensurable in length. [elem.10.11]
Therefore ,  are medial straight lines commensurable in square only which contain a rational rectangle; therefore  is a first apotome of a medial straight line. [elem.10.74]
And it is the 
 of the area .
Therefore the 
 of the area  is a first apotome of a medial straight line. Q. E. D.
