Enunciation:
, ,

Proof:
For in the equilateral pentagon  let, first, three angles taken in order, those at , , , be equal to one another; I say that the pentagon  is equiangular.
For let , ,  be joined.
Now, since the two sides ,  are equal to the two sides ,  respectively, and the angle  is equal to the angle , therefore the base  is equal to the base , the triangle  is equal to the triangle , and the remaining angles will be equal to the remaining angles, namely those which the equal sides subtend, [elem.1.4] that is, the angle  to the angle , and the angle  to the angle ; hence the side  is also equal to the side . [elem.1.6]
But the whole  was also proved equal to the whole ; therefore the remainder  is also equal to the remainder .
But  is also equal to .
Therefore the two sides ,  are equal to the two sides , ; and the base  is common to them; therefore the angle  is equal to the angle . [elem.1.8]
But the angle  was also proved equal to the angle ; therefore the whole angle  is also equal to the whole angle .
But, by hypothesis, the angle  is equal to the angles at , ; therefore the angle  is also equal to the angles at , .
Similarly we can prove that the angle  is also equal to the angles at , , ; therefore the pentagon  is equiangular.
Next, let the given equal angles not be angles taken in order, but let the angles at the points , ,  be equal; I say that in this case too the pentagon  is equiangular.
For let  be joined.
Then, since the two sides ,  are equal to the two sides , , and they contain equal angles, therefore the base  is equal to the base , the triangle  is equal to the triangle , and the remaining angles will be equal to the remaining angles, namely those which the equal sides subtend; [elem.1.4] therefore the angle  is equal to the angle .
But the angle  is also equal to the angle , since the side  is also equal to the side . [elem.1.5]
Therefore the whole angle  is equal to the whole angle .
But the angle  is, by hypothesis, equal to the angles at , ; therefore the angle  is also equal to the angles at , .
For the same reason the angle  is also equal to the angles at , , .
Therefore the pentagon  is equiangular. Q. E. D.
