Enunciation:
, ;

Proof:
Let the diameter  of the given sphere be set out, and let it be bisected at ; let the semicircle  be described on , let  be drawn from  at right angles to , let  be joined; let the square , having each of its sides equal to , be set out, let ,  be joined, from the point  let the straight line  be set up at right angles to the plane of the square  [elem.11.12], and let it be carried through to the other side of the plane, as ; from the straight lines ,  let ,  be respectively cut off equal to one of the straight lines , , , , and let , , , , , , ,  be joined.
Then, since  is equal to , and the angle  is right, therefore the square on  is double of the square on . [elem.1.47]
Again, since  is equal to , and the angle  is right, therefore the square on  is double of the square on . []
But the square on  was also proved double of the square on ; therefore the square on  is equal to the square on ; therefore  is equal to .
For the same reason  is also equal to ; therefore the triangle  is equilateral.
Similarly we can prove that each of the remaining triangles of which the sides of the square  are the bases, and the points ,  the vertices, is equilateral; therefore an octahedron has been constructed which is contained by eight equilateral triangles.
It is next required to comprehend it in the given sphere, and to prove that the square on the diameter of the sphere is double of the square on the side of the octahedron.
For, since the three straight lines , ,  are equal to one another, therefore the semicircle described on  will also pass through .
And for the same reason, if,  remaining fixed, the semicircle be carried round and restored to the same position from which it began to be moved, it will also pass through the points , , , and the octahedron will have been comprehended in a sphere.
I say next that it is also comprehended in the given sphere.
For, since  is equal to , while  is common, and they contain right angles, therefore the base  is equal to the base . [elem.1.4]
And, since the angle  is right, for it is in a semicircle, [elem.3.31] therefore the square on  is double of the square on . [elem.1.47]
Again, since  is equal to ,  is double of .
But, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on ; therefore the square on  is double of the square on .
But the square on  was also proved double of the square on .
And the square on  is equal to the square on , for  was made equal to .
Therefore the square on  is also equal to the square on ; therefore  is equal to .
And  is the diameter of the given sphere; therefore  is equal to the diameter of the given sphere.
Therefore the octahedron has been comprehended in the given sphere, and it has been demonstrated at the same time that the square on the diameter of the sphere is double of the square on the side of the octahedron. Q. E. D.
