Enunciation:
.

Proof:
Let two numbers ,  be set out such that the sum of them  has to  the ratio which a square number has to a square number, but has not to  the ratio which a square number has to a square number.
Let any other number , not square, be set out also, and let it not have to either of the numbers .  the ratio which a square number has to a square number.
Let any rational straight line  be set out, and let it be contrived that, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on ; [elem.10.6.p.1] therefore the square on  is commensurable with the square on . [elem.10.6]
And  is rational; therefore  is also rational.
And, since  has not to  the ratio which a square number has to a square number, neither has the square on  to the square on  the ratio which a square number has to a square number; therefore  is incommensurable in length with . [elem.10.9]
Next let it be contrived that, as the number  is to , so is the square on  to the square on ; [elem.10.6.p.1] therefore the square on  is commensurable with the square on . [elem.10.6]
But  is rational; therefore  is also rational.
And, since  has not to  the ratio which a square number has to a square number, neither has the square on  to the square on  the ratio which a square number has to a square number; therefore  is incommensurable in length with . [elem.10.9]
Therefore ,  are rational straight lines commensurable in square only; therefore  is binomial. [elem.10.36]
I say next that it is also a third binomial straight line.
For since, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on , and, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on , therefore, , as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on . [elem.5.22]
But  has not to  the ratio which a square number has to a square number; therefore neither has the square on  to the square on  the ratio which a square number has to a square number; therefore  is incommensurable in length with . [elem.10.9]
And since, as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on , therefore the square on  is greater than the square on .
Let then the squares on ,  be equal to the square on ; therefore, , as  is to , so is the square on  to the square on . [elem.5.19.p.1]
But  has to  the ratio which a square number has to a square number; therefore the square on  also has to the square on  the ratio which a square number has to a square number; therefore  is commensurable in length with . [elem.10.9]
Therefore the square on  is greater than the square on  by the square on a straight line commensurable with .
And ,  are rational straight lines commensurable in square only, and neither of them is commensurable in length with .
Therefore  is a third binomial straight line. Q. E. D.
