Enunciation:


Proof:
Let , ,  be the given numbers, as many as we please; thus it is required to find the least of those which have the same ratio with , , .
, ,  are either prime to one another or not.
Now, if , ,  are prime to one another, they are the least of those which have the same ratio with them. [elem.7.21]
But, if not, let  the greatest common measure of , ,  be taken, [elem.7.3] and, as many times as  measures the numbers , , 
       respectively, so many units let there be in the numbers , ,  respectively.
Therefore the numbers , ,  measure the numbers , ,  respectively according to the units in . [elem.7.16]
Therefore , ,  measure , ,  the same number of times; therefore , ,  are in the same ratio with , , . [elem.7.def.20]
I say next that they are the least that are in that ratio.
For, if , ,  are not the least of those which have the same ratio with , , , there will be numbers less than , ,  which are in the same ratio with , , .
Let them be , , ; therefore  measures  the same number of times that the numbers ,  measure the numbers ,  respectively.
Now, as many times as  measures , so many units let there be in ; therefore the numbers ,  also measure the numbers ,  respectively according to the units in .
And, since  measures  according to the units in , therefore  also measures  according to the units in . [elem.7.16]
For the same reason  also measures the numbers ,  according to the units in the numbers ,  respectively;
Therefore  measures , , .
Now, since  measures  according to the units in , therefore  by multiplying  has made . [elem.7.def.15]
For the same reason also  by multiplying  has made .
Therefore the product of ,  is equal to the product of , .
Therefore, as  is to , so is  to . [elem.7.19]
But  is greater than ; therefore  is also greater than .
And it measures , , : which is impossible, for by hypothesis  is the greatest common measure of , , .
Therefore there cannot be any numbers less than , ,  which are in the same ratio with , , .
Therefore , ,  are the least of those which have the same ratio with , , . Q. E. D.
