Enunciation:


Proof:
Let  be a minor and  a rational straight line, and to the rational straight line  let  be applied equal to the square on  and producing  as breadth; I say that  is a fourth apotome.
For let  be the annex to ; therefore ,  are straight lines incommensurable in square which make the sum of the squares on ,  rational, but twice the rectangle ,  medial. [elem.10.76]
To  let there be applied  equal to the square on  and producing  as breadth, and  equal to the square on , producing  as breadth; therefore the whole  is equal to the squares on , .
And the sum of the squares on ,  is rational; therefore  is also rational.
And it is applied to the rational straight line , producing  as breadth; therefore  is also rational and commensurable in length with . [elem.10.20]
And, since the whole  is equal to the squares on , , and, in these,  is equal to the square on , therefore the remainder  is equal to twice the rectangle , . [elem.2.7]
Let then  be bisected at the point , and let  be drawn through  parallel to either of the straight lines , ; therefore each of the rectangles ,  is equal to the rectangle , .
And, since twice the rectangle ,  is medial and is equal to , therefore  is also medial.
And it is applied to the rational straight line , producing  as breadth; therefore  is rational and incommensurable in length with . [elem.10.22]
And, since the sum of the squares on ,  is rational, while twice the rectangle ,  is medial, the squares on ,  are incommensurable with twice the rectangle , .
But  is equal to the squares on , , and  equal to twice the rectangle , ; therefore  is incommensurable with .
But, as  is to , so is  to ; [elem.6.1] therefore  is incommensurable in length with . [elem.10.11]
And both are rational; therefore ,  are rational straight lines commensurable in square only; therefore  is an apotome. [elem.10.73]
I say that it is also a fourth apotome.
For, since ,  are incommensurable in square, therefore the square on  is also incommensurable with the square on .
And  is equal to the square on , and  equal to the square on ; therefore  is incommensurable with .
But, as  is to , so is  to ; [elem.6.1] therefore  is incommensurable in length with . [elem.10.11]
And, since the rectangle ,  is a mean proportional between the squares on , , and the square on  is equal to , the square on  to , and the rectangle ,  to , therefore  is a mean proportional between , ; therefore, as  is to , so is  to .
But, as  is to , so is  to , and, as  is to , so is  to ; [elem.6.1] therefore, as  is to , so is  to ; [elem.5.11] therefore the rectangle ,  is equal to the square on  [elem.6.17], that is, to the fourth part of the square on .
Since then ,  are two unequal straight lines, and the rectangle ,  equal to the fourth part of the square on  and deficient by a square figure has been applied to  and divides it into incommensurable parts, therefore the square on  is greater than the square on  by the square on a straight line incommensurable with . [elem.10.18]
And the whole  is commensurable in length with the rational straight line  set out; therefore  is a fourth apotome. [elem.10.def.3.4]
Therefore etc. Q. E. D.
